GF bagels!! Flour mix roughly based on David Batten’s sandwich bread. Very pleased with how it turned out - chewy outside & soft inside. Will share recipe as soon as I write it down properly.
Edited
I have uploaded the recipe in the Files section. Am also copy-pasting it here. Please try and let me know how it turns out for you.
Dry Ingredients (Flour mix roughly based on David Batten’s sandwich bread mix)
150 g sorghum flour
100 g white rice flour
80 g potato starch
80 g corn flour (corn starch)
90 g tapioca starch
2 tsp Salt
15 g whole psyllium husk
Wet Ingredients
450 - 475 ml warm water (depending on your flour)
2 tbsp honey
7 g active dried yeast
3 egg whites (medium size)
2 tbsp melted butter
1 tsp apple cider vinegar
Topping
2 tbsp poppy seeds
2 tbsp sesame seeds
1 tbsp garlic powder
1 tbsp onion powder
1 tsp Himalayan pink salt
2 tbsp melted butter
Method
Mix 50ml water, honey and the yeast and let it rest for 10 minutes
Mix all dry ingredients thoroughly
To the dry ingredients, add all wet ingredients including the yeast mix. Add all except 25ml of water. Hand mix everything well till the dough comes together. The dough should not feel too dry. If dry, add little by little from the remaining 25ml water. Cover and rest the dough for 15 minutes.
Divide the dough into 10 equal portions - I eyeballed this. Make a smooth ball of each portion and gently pat the ball between your palms to form a disc of about 2cm thickness. With a wet finger, punch a hole in the middle of the disc and gently expand it till you get the desired shape of a bagel. Repeat this for the rest of the dough.
Cover the shaped bagels and rest till they increase in size by about 25-30% - it took abot 30 minutes in my 28C kitchen. I rested them on parchment paper.
Bring a large pot of water to boil. When it comes to a rolling boil, add a tsp of sugar and a tsp of baking soda to the water. Gently drop the bagels into the boiling water one at a time with a slotted spoon, making sure it is not crowded in the pot. I boiled 2 bagels at a time. Cook each side in the boiling water for about a minute each - the bagels would be floating in the water all the time.
Take the bagel out from the boiling water using a slotted spoon one by one and rest them on a parchment lined baking sheet.
Coat each bagel with melted butter. Mix all ingredients for topping (except melted butter) and sprinkle on top of the bagel.
Pre-heat oven to 220 C (425F). Bake the bagels for 15-20 minutes or until they turn golden brown. Mine took 20 minutes. Cool the bagels on a wire rack for about an hour. Enjoy!