olive bread GF

Flour mixes take from the /Users/lilit/food_project/recipes/GF/GF_flour_mixes.txt

310ml lukewarm water
3 tablespoons of oil (here olive oil, as usual, we're getting to know each other, I need some taste!)
1 tsp of brown sugar or honey (always to obtain a nice golden crust and to avoid the gloominess of albino gluten-free bread)
8g fine salt (aka TBKL - The Big Killer of Yeast - always kept away from yeast, always)
200g of gluten-free flour mix special for bread (universal house mix or special bread mix from the store)
100g of corn flour
18g of fresh yeast or 7g of dry yeast (dry yeast works very well but I admit preferring fresh for best results)
1 teaspoon of Psyllium
To add after 5 minutes of kneading:

about twenty black olives, pitted and sliced, as well as the equivalent of a sprig of fresh rosemary from which you have peeled the leaves.
PREPERATION

Step 1

In your breadmaker's bowl put the salt, oil, sugar (or honey) and lukewarm water,
then add the flours and yeast and psyllium.

Note: why sugar or honey? (I prefer honey)
Above all, do not panic, your bread will not be sweet.
In fact the sugar (honey) will give you a nice brown crust in your bread.
 Are you desperate for your gluten-free breads that rival your thighs on the first day at the beach?
 Add more sugar! However, it only works with bread, sorry!

Advice: if you use dry yeast you can give it a little boost: before placing all
your ingredients in your tank, you can take a little water at the 310ml provided for
 the recipe to dilute the yeast and there you go. add a little powdered sugar !!
 you will see, your yeast will come back to life: it will make pretty fine bubbles which will turn into foam.
 I advise you to do it 10 minutes before starting to make your bread, which means that you will
 have to heat your water afterwards.
Warning: never boiling water to boost your yeast otherwise you will kill it ...
if if I swear to you, an assassin is sleeping in all of us!

2nd step

Start the dough program on your bread maker or run your food processor at low speed.
If you work in a bread machine: do not close the lid and do not let the kneader of
your bread machine take care of itself.
With a spatula scrape the edges of the bowl or the bowl to help the kneader
to knead everything evenly. Knead for 5 to 10 minutes and make sure that your dough
(this is what we call bread dough) is homogeneous.
 Add the black olives and the rosemary leaves (keep some for decorating the bread).

Step 3

When the dough is homogeneous, close the lid of your bread maker or cover the bowl
of your food processor with a very slightly damp cloth.
If you don't have a bread maker - which will maintain a temperature between 24 and 28 ° C
to help push the dough up - consider placing the dough in a warm, draft-free place.
Let the "dough" program of your machine end or let it grow for 45 to 50 minutes.

Step 4

Preheat your oven to 220 ° C. Under the grill, where you are going to bake your bread, put a plate or another grill and place a container there (metal is better, it avoids “slamming”) which supports cooking, let it heat empty in your oven. (Yes I know it's weird but you will soon understand why)

Step 5

Normally your dough ball is already well inflated, you can be proud of it,
you have already completed half of the mission perfectly.

Unmould the dough on a floured work surface.
Knead the dough by hand with floured hands
(be careful, gluten-free dough is more sticky than the others so remember
to provide a small bowl with gluten-free flour next to you in case of a hard blow).
This is called "degassing", basically you will evacuate the excess gas from the dough
and therefore avoid the "fallout" of it (you know the story of soufflé? It's the same) .
Once your dough has become homogeneous again, the choice is yours,
either form a single ball or separate it into several small portions to obtain several buns.

Shape your bread by hand: ball, elongated, baguette,
spiked baguette (by cutting the sides with scissors), etc.
Flour the bread (s) or brush it lightly with water before decorating it with a few
slices of black olives and a few rosemary leaves.

Place your bread (or your buns) in the mold of your choice
(cake mold, ovenproof pan, etc.) and cover it with a dry cloth,
place the mold in a warm place without electricity. air and let grow again for 30 minutes.

Step 6

After the second push, the dough swelled again. It's time to bake.
Just before, you have to think about incising your or your bread with a thin blade.
Make a thin incision, at an angle to a maximum depth of 5mm. Why incise the bread?
Simply to help the bread to evacuate the CO2 as well as the water vapor it contains.
This will create a kind of chimney which will help the bread to swell well.

Place your bread in the oven and just after placing them in the oven put a large glass of
water in the previously heated container.
Instantly steam will form, immediately close the oven!

This is what we call "the blow of steam" in baking, without it no thin,
brown and crispy crust but just white bread with a soft crust!
It is essential to do this within the first 10 minutes of cooking
(this is where the crust of the bread will form) otherwise it will be pointless afterwards.

Bake your bread between 25 to 30 minutes depending on the desired baking
(if you have made several rolls, baking 15 to 20 minutes will suffice).

Step 7

Take the bread out of the oven and place it on a raised rack while it cools down,
this will prevent it from getting wet. A hot bread gives off water vapor,
so it is necessary to let it escape so that your bread does not get soggy.

Step 8

The most complicated: wait before tasting!